Document current multi-SDK band situation (#13697)
dotnet/arcade: Documentation/UnifiedBuild/VMR-Managing-SDK-Bands.md

- **Full VMR (Backflow)** – future final state where changes can be made in the VMR too and flow both ways. Dependency flow at that time will be only between VMR and individual repos, not between individual repos themselves.
- **Source-Build** – A set of sources and a process which allows to build the entire product end to end including all its dependencies in offline mode, excluding native dependencies from the source.
- **Microsoft build** – The current build methodology used to assemble the final product.
- **SDK branch** – A git branch related to a specific SDK band, e.g. `release/8.0.1xx`.
- **Non-SDK branch** – A git branch common for all associated SDK bands, e.g. `release/8.0`.
- **Intermediate packages** – Packaged build produces of each of the individual repositories either built in their source repos or during the subsequent build of each individual repository component within the VMR. These are used during package flow between the VMR and the individual repositories.
- **Maestro** - a service used by the .NET team to manage dependency flow between repositories.

## SDK bands

> To align with new Visual Studio releases, .NET SDK updates sometimes include new features or new versions of components such as Roslyn or MSBuild. These new features or components may be incompatible with the versions that shipped in previous SDK updates for the same major or minor version. To differentiate such updates, the .NET SDK uses the concept of feature bands. While these bands differ in their feature set they share some common parts such as the .NET runtime.

Reviewer: Point for future discussion: If VS does this, other IDEs (e.g. Unity) may want to do it too. We may want to think about what they would do if they wanted to be on the same plan as VS: take the stock runtime and combine it with their own IDE-specific SDK band, using unified build infrastructure. It is a theoretical exercise at this moment, but it may help us ensure that model is solid.

Once we hit each release day (denoted with red vertical lines), we take the latest commit of each of those branches (that already exist) and release those together. For the releases in the example diagram, this might be:

- Release day #1 – `8.0.0` runtime + one SDK (`8.0.100`)
- Release day #2 – `8.0.6` runtime + two SDKs (`8.0.109`, `8.0.205`)
- Release day #3 – `8.0.12` runtime + three SDKs (`8.0.111`, `8.0.207`, `8.0.302`)

### Current code flow

To organize what ends up in each band and to drive the code flow between the repositories, we utilize the Maestro dependency flow, namely the Maestro channels (see [Channels, Branches and Subscriptions](../BranchesChannelsAndSubscriptions.md for details):

> - **VS-centric channels** – To better match how teams opererate, some repositories align their build outputs with the Visual Studio versions, e.g. `dotnet/roslyn`. Outputs of repositories like that would end up in a channel named based on the version of VS, e.g. `17.5`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **VS-centric channels** – To better match how teams operate, some repositories align their build outputs with the Visual Studio versions, e.g. `dotnet/roslyn`. Outputs of repositories like that would end up in a channel named based on the version of VS, e.g. `17.5`.
```

- **Individual/Source repository** – One of the current development repositories, e.g., `dotnet/runtime`. An "individual product repository" is then one that contains code for part of the product (but no individual repository contains code to build the whole .NET Core product).
- **VMR (Virtual Monolithic Repository)** – A repository containing code layout that produces the official build product of .NET Core. The repository contains individual product repositories plus tooling to enable a full build of the product.
- **VMR-lite** – present state where changes only flow one way into the VMR which is read-only.
- **Full VMR (Backflow)** – future final state where changes can be made in the VMR too and flow both ways. Dependency flow at that time will be only between VMR and individual repos, not between individual repos themselves.
- **Source-Build** – A set of sources and a process which allows to build the entire product end to end including all its dependencies in offline mode, excluding native dependencies from the source.

> - **Microsoft build** – The current build methodology used to assemble the final product.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Microsoft build** – The current build methodology used to assemble the final product that Microsoft ships binaries from.
```

- **SDK branch** – A git branch related to a specific SDK band, e.g. `release/8.0.1xx`.
- **Non-SDK branch** – A git branch common for all associated SDK bands, e.g. `release/8.0`.

> - **Intermediate packages** – Packaged build produces of each of the individual repositories either built in their source repos or during the subsequent build of each individual repository component within the VMR. These are used during package flow between the VMR and the individual repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Intermediate packages** – Packaged build products of each of the individual repositories either built in their individual repo source-build or during the build of each individual repository component within the full VMR build. These are used during package flow between the VMR and the individual repositories, and in the VMR build itself.
```

Reviewer 2: It might be better to break down this bullet into multiple sub-bullets to be more readable.

    checkout release/8.0.1xx
    commit type: HIGHLIGHT tag: "Release #3 – SDK 8.0.111"
    checkout release/8.0.3xx
    commit type: HIGHLIGHT tag: "Release #3 – SDK 8.0.302"
    checkout main
    commit
```

In parallel, this would represent the state of a shared repository (e.g., `dotnet/runtime`) that is not specific to any particular SDK band:

```mermaid
%%{init: { 'logLevel': 'debug', 'theme': 'base', 'gitGraph': {'showCommitLabel': false, 'tagLabelFontSize': '24px'}} }%%
gitGraph
    commit
    commit
    branch release/8.0
    checkout release/8.0
    commit
    commit type: HIGHLIGHT tag: "Release #1 – Runtime 8.0.0"
    commit
    checkout main
    commit
    commit
    commit
    checkout release/8.0
    commit
    commit
    commit type: HIGHLIGHT tag: "Release #2 – Runtime 8.0.1"
    checkout main
    commit
    commit
    commit
    checkout release/8.0
    commit
    commit
    checkout main
    commit
    checkout release/8.0
    commit
    commit
    checkout main
    commit
    commit
    commit
    checkout release/8.0
    commit
    commit type: HIGHLIGHT tag: "Release #3 – Runtime 8.0.2"
    checkout main
    commit
    commit
```

> On the image you can see timelines of branches of two different repositories – `dotnet/sdk` and `dotnet/runtime`. As noted previously, each (servicing) release of .NET contains multiple SDK bands but only one runtime. Each individual repository of each component that needs to differ per band would then have these so-called *“SDK branches”* named `release/Z.0.Yxx` while repositories that are shared per release have the non-SDK `release/Z.0` branches. As shown in the example, the development of the single runtime would happen in the `release/8.0` branch while the various SDK bands are stored in the following SDK branches (e.g., `release/8.0.1xx` represents the “100th band”).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the image you can see timelines of branches of two different repositories – `dotnet/sdk` and `dotnet/runtime`. As noted previously, each (servicing) release of .NET may contain multiple SDK bands but **only** one runtime. Each individual repository of each component that needs to differ per band would then have these so-called *“SDK branches”* named `release/Z.0.Yxx` while repositories that are shared per release have the non-SDK `release/Z.0` branches. As shown in the example, the development of the single runtime would happen in the `release/8.0` branch while the various SDK bands are stored in the following SDK branches (e.g., `release/8.0.1xx` represents the “100th band”).
```
The individual components do not necessarily follow SDK branch naming patterns. Roslyn might use `release/devM.N` while templating uses `release/Z.0.Yxx`.

Maybe a more accurate statement is that each servicing release may include release of multiple SDK product bands, but only one runtime. Then go on to explain how these product bands are represented.

    channel174[(VS 17.4 channel)]
    sdk2xx[dotnet/sdk<br />release/7.0.2xx]
    channel2xx[(.NET 7.0.2xx SDK<br />channel)]

    subgraph Shared components
        runtime[dotnet/runtime<br />release/7.0]
        aspnetcore[dotnet/aspnetcore<br />release/7.0]
        arcade[dotnet/arcade<br />release/7.0]
        channel7[(.NET 7<br />channel)]
        channel7Eng[(.NET 7 Eng<br />channel)]
    end

    roslyn175[dotnet/roslyn<br />dev/17.5]
    channel175[(VS 17.5 channel)]
    sdk3xx[dotnet/sdk<br />release/7.0.3xx]
    channel3xx[(.NET 7.0.3xx SDK<br />channel)]

    roslyn174-->channel174
    channel174-->sdk2xx
    sdk2xx-->channel2xx
    channel2xx-->installer2xx

    runtime-->channel7
    aspnetcore-->channel7
    arcade-->channel7Eng

    channel7-->installer3xx
    channel7-->installer2xx
    channel7Eng-->installer2xx
    channel7Eng-->installer3xx

    roslyn175-->channel175
    channel175-->sdk3xx
    sdk3xx-->channel3xx
    channel3xx-->installer3xx

    installer2xx[dotnet/installer<br />release/7.0.2xx]
    installer3xx[dotnet/installer<br />release/7.0.3xx]

    class channel174,channel175,channel2xx,channel3xx,channel7,channel7Eng Channel
```

> This setup makes sure that the latest version of each shared component (e.g., runtime) eventually flows to all SDK branches which then become coherent between each other. **We call the SDK bands coherent when the versions of all shared components of each band are the same**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This setup makes sure that the latest version of each shared component (e.g., runtime) eventually flows to all SDK products. Over time, the SDK products become coherent. **We call the SDK bands coherent when the versions of all shared components of each band are the same**.
```

Reviewer 2: We don't ever really become truly coherent in a servicing release. We define incoherency as:

*A state of the traditional product build graph in which multiple versions of the same component are transitively referenced, and where the difference in those versions does or could have _meaningful_ impact on product functionality. For instance, if two dotnet/runtimes are referenced within the same SDK, one may be packaged with the SDK, but the other may have been what `dotnet/aspnetcore` was built against. If there are meaningful differences between those two runtimes, `dotnet/aspnetcore` may not operate as expected.*

The coherency we drive for is when we don't have any **meaningful** incoherency.

Author: Gotcha, will re-phrase it a bit

Reviewer 2: We'll have coherency in 9.0 for at least the Linux source build (same as today). I expect that many repos will still be incoherent for product reasons when building the Microsoft product. For example, a different version of the CodeAnalysis packages will be used to build the various analyzers in the roslyn-analyzers repo.

### Band lifecycle

> As described above, the band lifecycle is tightly coupled with the releases of Visual Studio. The exception is 100th band that ships on .NET annual schedule and VS snaps to it. For repositories that target the VS-centric bands, the `main` branch usually targets the next VS version which is in preview. Once a version of VS is released (is GA-ed), we create a new branch named `dev/XX.Y` where `XX.Y` is the version of the released VS. The `main` branch then targets the next VS version in preview

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As described above, the band lifecycle is tightly coupled with the releases of Visual Studio. The exception is 100th band that ships on .NET's annual schedule and VS snaps to it. For repositories that target the VS-centric bands, the `main` branch usually targets the next VS version which is in preview. Once a version of VS is released (is GA-ed), we create a new branch named `dev/XX.Y` where `XX.Y` is the version of the released VS. The `main` branch then targets the next VS version in preview
```

As an example, let's say we have the following setup:
- VS `17.1` is the latest stable version of VS and is associated with the `7.0.1xx` band.
- VS `17.2` is in preview and is associated with the `7.0.2xx` band.
- VS-centric repositories would have a `dev/17.1` branch targeting the `17.1` channel and a `main` branch targeting `17.2`.
- The `17.1` channel would then flow into the `7.0.1xx` branches and the `17.2` channel would flow into the `7.0.2xx`.
- The `7.0.1xx` branches would then flow into the `7.0.1xx` SDK channel and the `7.0.2xx` branches would flow into the `7.0.2xx` SDK channel.

> - The `7.0` and `7.0 Eng` channels would collect builds of shared repositories and flow into their respective `7.0.Yxx` branches.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `7.0` and `7.0 Eng` channels would collect builds of shared repositories and flow into their respective `7.0.Yxx` branches.
```
I would explain here that the 2xx branch would only get live updates from the `7.0` when it was time for GA. Otherwise, it would snap to the previous servicing release of the 7.0 shared components.

> For this setup, we'd say the 100th band is in **servicing** and the 200th band is in **preview**. It is important to also note that **while a band is in preview, it uses the lastly released .NET runtime** while **the servicing band revs with the `7.0` channel**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this setup, we'd say the 100th band is in **servicing** and the 200th band is in **preview**. It is important to also note that **while a band is in preview, it uses the most recently released .NET runtime** while **the servicing band revs with the `7.0` channel**.
```

When we would be ready to release VS `17.2`, we'd flow the latest shared components into the 200th band branches so that it becomes coherent with the 100th band. Then we'd release the coherent bands and after we would do the following:

> - We'd create the `dev/17.2` branch in VS-centric repositories, point it to the `17.2` channel and retarget `main` to `dev/17.3`.

Reviewer 2: This might not happen in this exact order. The 17.2 branches might be created earlier, or later. That's up to the owner of the shared tooling repo. The channel system allows some flexibility because you separate a branch's name with its purpose.

> - We'd snap branches of SDK repositories by branching `7.0.3xx` from `7.0.4xx`. While doing that, we'd update the runtime version of `7.0.3xx` to the just released version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We'd snap branches of SDK repositories by branching `7.0.3xx` from `7.0.2xx`. While doing that, we'd update the runtime version of `7.0.3xx` to the just released version.
```

> - We would set up the `7.0` shared channels to start flowing into the `7.0.3xx` branches as the runtime there would start reving.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We would set up the `7.0` shared channels to start flowing into the `7.0.2xx` branches as the runtime there would start revving.
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    VMR[VMR]
    arcade[dotnet/arcade]
    runtime[dotnet/runtime]
    roslyn[dotnet/roslyn]
    sdk[dotnet/sdk]
    other[...]

    arcade-->VMR
    runtime-->VMR
    roslyn-->VMR
    sdk-->VMR
    other-->VMR
    VMR-->arcade
    VMR-->runtime
    VMR-->roslyn
    VMR-->sdk
    VMR-->other
```

The updates of the VMR will no longer happen when `dotnet/installer` is updated but rather whenever a new build appears in one of the channels. The information making the builds of the `dev/17.4` branch of `dotnet/roslyn` end up in the `7.0.3xx` SDK band is stored in the configuration of Maestro subscriptions between those branches. The Maestro service will have to follow this configuration and update the corresponding sources (the right folder of the right branch) of the VMR accordingly. It will also have to flow changes the other way too when a change is made in the VMR or when VMR produces a new intermediate package. **This is all new functionality that Maestro will have to implement.** That being said, both proposed solutions seem orthogonal to this and the impact on the Maestro changes needed should be minimal.

### Release process

> The dependency flow eventually flows all the bits into the `dotnet/installer` repository which also uses the SDK branching. Each of those branches then produces an official build – so one build per band – and we release those. The exact process is that a dedicated person selects all the right official builds which are coherent on the shared bits (so each has the same of the runtime for instance) and inputs the IDs of these builds into the staging pipeline called `Stage-DotNet`. **During this process, it is important for the MSFT build that the shared bits are only built once officially and then re-used in the respective band builds.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The dependency flow eventually flows all the bits into the `dotnet/installer` repository which also uses the SDK branching. Each of those branches then produces an official build – so one build per band – and we release those. The exact process is that a dedicated person selects all the right official builds which are coherent on the shared bits (so each has the same of the runtime for instance) and inputs the IDs of these builds into the staging pipeline called `Stage-DotNet`. **During this process, it is important for the that the shared bits are only built once officially and then re-used in the respective band builds.**
```
